---
title: 'About that banner'
excerpt: 'Elementary cellular automata: chaos and computation distilled to a simple basis.'
date: '2021-12-13'
author:
  name: Riley Stewart
---
I've been having a lot of fun today working on the banner for this blog.  My creation is a visualisation of elementary cellular automata, with each column being a state that wraps around, and the next state being to the right of the previous one.  If you click on it, you should be able to see some controls for changing various parameters, most interesting being the rule.

Checkout out [Wolfram's page](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/ElementaryCellularAutomaton.html) for more details about their operation.  I feel especially confident pointing there because Stephen Wolfram was the original discoverer and namer of elementary cellular automata.  The banner, by default, displays rule 30, perhaps the most famous among them.  Rule 30 exhibits the property of chaos, where future states cannot be predicted from the starting state other than by running through them, as [sexily explained by Jeff Goldblum in *Jurassic Park*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n-mpifTiPV4).  It's fascinating that out of a few rules a simple system can degenerate into something unpredictable so quickly, and even be a [source for cryptographic randomness](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.89.6724&rep=rep1&type=pdf), which I use for the `seed` parameter to generate a random initial state.

But the weirdness with these simple automata doesn't stop there - Wolfram also showed that [rule 110 is capable of universal computation](https://www.wolframscience.com/nks/notes-11-8--history-of-universality-in-1d-cellular-automata/)!  Reduction to the basis of the Turing machine is the basis of proofs of computational singularity, as with [Conway's Game of Life](http://rendell-attic.org/gol/tm.htm) and [brainfuck](http://brainfuck.org/urmutm.b).  Of course actual silicon computation has a much more pragmatic basis but the theoretical notion of computability has immense importance across many domains.

There's a lot of diversity across the 256 possible rules.  Many of them produce relatively linear patterns or quickly halt, especially with smaller window sizes.  Others are reflections or inversions of other rules.  Rules like 90 create Sierpinski triangles of Zelda fame.  The behavior is one of the simplest examples of emergence, where complex patterns arise out of a few simple rules.

So, if you haven't yet, go ahead and click on the banner - that should bring up the controls.  From there you can change a few parameters: the rule number, window size, cell size, and seed.  I recommend playing around with the rule number and window size to see the different kind of structures that emerge from either seed 0, which means one bit and the rest zeroes, as well as random seeds.

### Technical details
([code for automata](https://github.com/ristew/blog/blob/main/lib/wolfram.js), [code for component](https://github.com/ristew/blog/blob/main/components/banner.js))

I decided to not look at any other implimentations of the automata, so some parts may be a little weird, but it produces accurate results so I'm happy.  First the rule number is converted to an array of booleans like its binary representation.  Then, to determine the next state of a cell, I find the numeric value of the binary representation of the 3 determinant cells, the cell in question and its two neighbors, wrapping around if our cell is at the beginning or end of the window.  Using this, the corresponding rule in the boolean array is the state of the cell in the next step.

The component is rendered with the browser Canvas API, which I found mostly enjoyable to use given that I render everything on one go.  The main issue was that by default the pixels are scaled oddly and look blurry because the canvas is scaled to the size of the window; to fix, the canvas' `width` and `height` attributes are specified based on the actual layout size and screen DPI.  This is all based on [this helpful post](https://medium.com/wdstack/fixing-html5-2d-canvas-blur-8ebe27db07da) - I wish all web shenanigans had such writeups.

As I mentioned earlier, the random initial states based off the seed are generated by the automata themselves.  The way the seed works is by creating a child instance with the same window size always in rule 30, then iterating seed times and using that state for the initial one in the parent.  I also ensure that the seed is greater than the window size so the final state is filled.

I have a few ideas for what to add in the future when I decide to come back to it.  I'd like to add some mechanism of persistence for settings, essentially letting people customize it for when they return to this blog.  What would be really cool is adding animation - I tried to with the basic Canvas APIs and I couldn't get a result I was happy with - it kept looking choppy and brought my laptop to a crawl.

Honestly, it feels really good to do some creative coding instead of pragmatic work.  As much as I love my role as a cloud plumber, there's a lot less sheer fun involved debugging system bugs compared to creating an interactive visualization.  Hopefully it's fun for you too. I'm confident the banner will stay atop my blog for a long time.
